---
#excerpt: ""
title: "Transnational public-private governance initiatives in world politics: Introducing a new dataset"
category: "Articles"
download: "https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11558-019-09366-w"
---
This article introduces a new dataset on transnational public-private governance
initiatives (TGIs) in world politics. TGIs are institutions in which states and/or intergovernmental
organizations cooperate with business and civil society actors to govern
transnational problems. Thus, they are a special type of transnational public-private
partnership. TGIs have flourished since the late 1990s and, today, govern a broad
range of global policy domains, including environmental protection, human rights,
health, trade, finance, and security. Yet, existing research lacks the data necessary
to map this phenomenon and its variation along dimensions, such as issue areas,
governance functions, participation, and institutional design. The Transnational
Public-Private Governance Initiatives inWorld Politics (TGIWP) data is designed for
this purpose. It contains detailed information on the scope, functions, participants,
and institutional design of 636 TGIs created between 1885 and 2017. I describe the
sample generation and discuss coding rules. I also map the proliferation and characteristics
of TGIs, and provide an exploratory analysis of the relationship between state
participation in TGIs and domestic democracy to show how the new data contributes
to enhancing ongoing debates in international relations. The article concludes by discussing
how the new dataset may be useful in future research on global governance.
